Published Time: 2022-06-08
Title: China harvests over half of summer crop, 11.13 mln hectares of wheat in 2022 so far
Category 1: SOURCE; Category 2: ECONOMY
Author: Global Times
Author title: Author details not found
Author description: Author details not found
Text: 
An agricultural machinery operator drives a harvester at a farm in Bozhou, East China's Anhui Province on May 27, 2022.
As Grain in Ear, a traditional Chinese calendar day signaling a proper time for farming, approaches, local farmers have ratcheted up efforts to either plant or harvest summer grain.
Photo: VCGChina's wheat harvest is on track to finish on schedule, with over 50 percent already harvested, the state broadcaster CCTV reported.
A total of 167 million mu (11.13 million hectares) of wheat across the country had been harvested as of Tuesday, two days ahead of previous years, due to increased efficiency.
In North China's Hebei and East China's Shandong provinces, agricultural specialists and harvesting machines were deployed to deal with natural disasters and improve farm efficiency.
China's central government has allocated 222.483 billion yuan ($33.27 billion) of funds targeting agricultural development in 2022, 12.18 billion yuan more than last year, and an extra 21.2 billion yuan of subsidies was granted for purchasing farming machinery.
Around 80 percent of the grain in Southwest China has been harvested, while harvesting of grain in the middle and lower reaches of the Yangtze River has started, the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs said.China has raised the national minimum purchase price of wheat to 115 yuan per 50 kilograms, up 2 yuan year-on-year, according to data from the National Food and Strategic Reserves Administration.The state-owned grain enterprise Sinograin is preparing to purchase harvested new grain, making ready warehouses with a capacity for more than 40 million tons of grain to ensure the revenue of farmers.
China is expected to achieve a bumper crop of summer grain despite COVID-19 resurgence, extreme warm weather pattern this year, and the conflict between Russia and Ukraine, two major grain exporters.
Some countries such as India and Afghanistan have announced they'll suspend their wheat exports to avoid domestic food shortages.
According to data from the General Administration of Customs, China's imports of wheat dropped 22.4 percent year-on-year in April to 700,000 tons.
Industry insiders suggested that China's wheat stocks are at a record high and can meet domestic demand for more than a year.
Taking into account of the global food shortage, China may cut imports this year, said analysts.Global Times
