Published Time: 2022-08-08
Title: Pelosi's Taiwan trip fuels new global turmoil
Category 1: OPINION; Category 2: VIEWPOINT
Author: Wang Wen
Author title: Author title not found
Author description: Wang Wen is professor and executive dean of Chongyang Institute for Financial Studies at Renmin University of China.
Text: 
In disregard of China's strong opposition and solemn representations, as well as the discouragement of many international mainstream media outlets and political dignitaries out of good intentions, US House Speaker Nancy Pelosi stubbornly carried out her visit to the island of Taiwan.
This trip has seriously violated the basic norms of international law established by the UN Charter, gravely reneged on US commitments made in the three China-US joint communiques and the one-China principle, which are the political foundation of China-US relations.
It's also a serious violation of China's sovereignty and territorial integrity, greatly undermining peace and stability across the Taiwan Straits.
After instigating the Ukraine crisis, the US has attempted to incite conflicts across the Taiwan Straits, which has fueled a new round of global turbulences in the Western Pacific region.Pelosi is the Speaker of the US House of Representatives and third most senior political figure of the US.
Her official foreign trips represent the US' exercise of its diplomatic power.
This time, Pelosi's visit to Singapore, Japan and South Korea can be called "state visits," but a trip to the island of Taiwan without China's permission trampled on China's sovereignty, and it is also a violation of the principles of sovereign equality and territorial integrity stipulated by the UN Charter.
The Chinese central government has repeatedly stated at the UN that there is only one China in the world, Taiwan is a part of China, and the government of the PRC is the sole legitimate government representing the entire China.
At present, this statement is a political reality recognized by the 181 countries that have established diplomatic relations with China and accounts for about 93.7 percent of UN member states.
It also represents the basic principles that most of the countries in the world must abide by in their official dealings with China.
In the 1972 Shanghai Communique, the Joint Communique on the Establishment of Diplomatic Relations between the People's Republic of China and the United States of America in 1978 and the Joint Communique of the People's Republic of China and the United States of America (August 17, 1982), both the Chinese and US governments clearly emphasize the adherence to the one-China principle.
The three joint communiques establish the political foundation for the normalization of China-US relations over the past half century, and are regarded as the code of conduct and cooperation norms to measure the diplomatic behaviors of the two countries.
As one of the main leaders of the US, Pelosi's visit to the Taiwan island obviously constitutes a violation of the norms of international law recognized by both China and the US.
It also betrays the political commitments the US has made to China.
Pelosi's Taiwan trip and support to the island echoed Biden's previous pledges at multiple occasions to defend Taiwan, which has sent a serious wrong signal to Taiwan secessionists and further aggravated cross-Straits tensions as well as the deterioration of China-US relations.
The Chinese mainland has always been willing to strive for peaceful reunification with the greatest sincerity, patience, and effort.
But in order to defend national sovereignty and territorial integrity, it has conducted the most intensive live-fire military exercises in six zones around the Taiwan island since the end of World War II, with the purpose of deterring the interference of external forces and the conspiracy of Taiwan secessionists.
Meanwhile, the Chinese government has taken eight countermeasures against the US and sanctioned Pelosi and her immediate family members.
The US is the instigator of the negative situation that continues the downward spiral of US-China relations, and Pelosi's trip to Taiwan is the new trigger.Many scholars, media and social organizations in most countries across the world have publicly criticized Pelosi.
Her "symbolic visit" will not bring any prospect of security and prosperity to Taiwan, but will only lead to strong defensive military countermeasures by the Chinese mainland.
Pelosi's Taiwan trip has further exposed the US' offshore balancing strategy in Eurasia.
The US incited the Russia-Ukraine conflict in early 2022, forming turmoil in the west of the Eurasian continent in which Ukraine is used to check Russia while Russia is used to pressure Europe.
The purpose of Pelosi's visit to Taiwan this time was to intensify conflicts across the Straits, spark military tension in the Western Pacific region, and try to induce new turmoil in the east of the Eurasian continent.
The US aims at achieving a new equilibrium in which the Taiwan island is used to check the mainland, whilst China's reactions subsequently put pressure on Japan, South Korea, Australia and India.
If East Asia is plunged into new chaos, the US, far from Eurasia, can exploit the situation to maintain its already crumbling global hegemony and renew its status as the world's only superpower that is now increasingly heading for an end.Obviously, in order to confront Russia and China, two strong Eurasian powers, the US is constructing an "arc zone" to promote a new containment strategy against China and Russia based on alliances.
This strategy of suppressing emerging powers is bound to meet resistance and pushback, leading to new major power security dilemmas.
This will cause the most intense major power competition and global turmoil in two directions of the Eurasian continent since the end of WWII.
It will undoubtedly see the world plagued even more by economic recession, raging pandemics, a food crisis.The author is Executive Dean of Chongyang Institute for Financial Studies, Renmin University of China, Executive Director and a Distinguished Professor of China-US People-to-People Exchange Research Center.
opinion@globaltimes.com.cn
