Published Time: 2022-08-13
Title: Chinese embassy urges US to assume obligations, not to make excuses for own mistakes after remarks on China's decision of halting climate talks over Pelosi's Taiwan visit
Category 1: CHINA; Category 2: DIPLOMACY
Author: Global Times
Author title: Author details not found
Author description: Author details not found
Text: 
The US should shoulder its own responsibilities and obligations rather than make excuses for its own mistakes, spokesperson for the Chinese Embassy in the UK said in response to US officials' claims that "the entire world will suffer the consequences" of the halt of climate change cooperation, referring to China's decision to suspend climate talks with the US due to US House Speaker Nancy Pelosi's provocative visit to the island of Taiwan.
The US does not represent the world.
China already warned the US in advance that Pelosi's visit to the island of Taiwan will likely lead to a crisis and cause major disruptions to exchanges and cooperation between China and the US.
But the US turned a deaf ear to this warning and went its own way, the embassy spokesperson said.
The Taiwan question is at the very heart of China's core interests.
The US has seriously undermined China's core interests while seeking cooperation from China where it needs it.
What kind of logic is this?
the spokesperson said.
China's decision to cancel or suspend cooperation in some areas does not come without warning.
We say what we mean and mean what we say.
There is no reason why the US should feel surprised or upset, the spokesperson stressed.
As a responsible major country, China will, as always, actively participate in international and multilateral cooperation on climate change.
We have solemnly announced that we will strive to achieve carbon peaking by 2030 and carbon neutrality by 2060.
We are striving to formulate and implement a "1+N" policy framework for low-carbon development and green transition, said the embassy spokesperson.China will continue to unswervingly march toward the goals of carbon peaking and neutrality, actively participate in the negotiations on climate change through major channels, provide support and assistance to developing countries within China's capacity, and make its own contributions to addressing this global challenge of climate change, the spokesperson said.The embassy spokesperson urged the US to assume its own international responsibilities and obligations, not make excuses for its own mistakes.
He also lambasted some US officials who compared the Taiwan question to Ukraine issue, claiming China's military drills in Taiwan Straits similar to Russian military operations in Ukraine out of ill intentions.Taiwan question and Ukraine issue are fundamentally different and not comparable at all.
Taiwan is an inalienable part of China's territory, and the Taiwan question is entirely China's internal affairs.
If the US values the principle of respecting sovereignty and territorial integrity, it should apply this principle to the Taiwan question, rather than practice any double standards, the spokesperson said.
It is unacceptable to urge respect for Ukraine's sovereignty and territorial integrity on the one hand and trample on China's red line on Taiwan and encroach up China's sovereignty and territorial integrity on the other.
Taiwan is China's Taiwan.
No foreign country is entitled to act as a judge on the Taiwan question, the spokesperson stressed.The US is used to stoking tensions and provoking troubles.
Between the end of the World War II and 2001, there were 248 armed conflicts in 153 regions across the world, among which 201 were initiated by the US.
Since 2001, wars and military operations launched by the US have resulted in over 800,000 deaths and tens of millions displaced from home, the spokesperson added.
After starting so many wars and killing so many civilians to preserve its hegemony, the US is now creating troubles in the Taiwan Straits.
"We will never allow this to happen," the spokesperson noted.
