Published Time: 2022-06-08
Title: European Parliament’s latest report concerning China is politically biased: Chinese Mission to the EU
Category 1: CHINA; Category 2: DIPLOMACY
Author: Global Times
Author title: Author details not found
Author description: Author details not found
Text: 
The Chinese Mission to the EU on Wednesday slammed a report adopted by the European Union concerning issues related to China's Taiwan, Hong Kong, Macao and Xinjiang as well as China's position on Ukraine, saying it is based on ideological bias.On Tuesday, the European Parliament at its plenary session adopted the report on the EU and the security challenges in the Indo-Pacific, claiming that China poses a threat to the EU's interests in the region, criticizing China's position on Ukraine, Taiwan, Hong Kong, Macao and Xinjiang-related issues, and calling for the EU to enhance the existing partnership with Taiwan island.
The parliament's report, based on ideological bias, distorts China's policy and position, plays up the "China threat" ideology, denies China's legitimate right to safeguard its sovereignty and security, and grossly interferes with China's internal affairs.
We express our strong disapproval of and firm opposition to it, the spokesperson of the Chinese Mission to EU said in a statement issued on Wednesday.Asia-Pacific?is the most vibrant region in the world and serves as a pacesetter for peace and development.
The key to success in the region is a mutually beneficial cooperation.
China is committed to building and benefiting the Asia-Pacific region, the spokesperson noted.
"We welcome positive and constructive participation of countries outside the region in Asia-Pacific cooperation.
It needs to be emphasized that?ganging up, provoking confrontation and creating rivalry is doomed to failure," the spokesperson added.As to the Taiwan, Hong Kong, Macao and Xinjiang-related affairs, the spokesperson said that these are entirely China's internal affairs, which allow no foreign interference.
The spokesperson noted that the One-China principle is a shared consensus of the international community and an established norm of international relations.
It is the political foundation on which China established diplomatic ties and develops relations with the EU.
Without this foundation, everything above will be shaky.
No one should underestimate the strong resolve, determination and capability of the Chinese government and the 1.4 billion Chinese people in safeguarding national sovereignty and territorial integrity, the spokesperson said.The spokesperson reiterated that China's position on Ukraine has been consistent and clear, as it has assumed an objective and impartial position all along and reached independent judgment based on the merits of the facts.
China has been working actively and playing a constructive role in promoting peace talks and preventing conflict and large-scale humanitarian crisis.
Time will prove that China's position is responsible and withstands the test of history.
Any disinformation that smears China's efforts, distorts China's intention, or creates rumors to discredit China is neither responsible nor ethical, the spokesperson said.The spokesperson urged the European Parliament to get in the right frame of mind, respect the facts and view China's development and domestic and foreign policies objectively and rationally.
It's important to respect the strong wish of Asia-Pacific countries for peace, development and cooperation, and do more to promote the healthy and stable development of China-EU relations and the stability and prosperity of the region.Powerful European lawmakers are also pushing to designate alleged human rights abuses against Uygurs and other ethnic Muslims in Xinjiang as "genocide" in a resolution set to reach the European Parliament this week, the South China Morning Post reported on Tuesday.The effort is to follow the US in hyping the so-called genocide allegation in China's Xinjiang region following the "unsupervised" and "open" visit of the UN human rights chief to China, experts pointed out while warning that "genocide" is a term that should be defined in strict accordance with international laws, rather than used as a political tool, and most European countries are aware of this.
Global Times
