Published Time: 2022-06-29
Title: No military assistance provided to parties involved in Russia-Ukraine conflict: Chinese Embassy in US
Category 1: SOURCE; Category 2: ECONOMY
Author: Global Times
Author title: Author details not found
Author description: Author details not found
Text: 
China-US Photo: GT China has not provided military assistance to parties involved in the Russia-Ukraine conflict and will firmly oppose unilateral sanctions on Chinese companies imposed by the US, the Chinese Embassy in the US told the Global Times on Wednesday.
The remarks came after the US Commerce Department added five Chinese enterprises to a trade blacklist for allegedly supporting Russia's military and defense industrial base, Reuters reported on Wednesday.
"China's position on the Ukrainian issue is consistent and clear.
We have been playing a constructive role in promoting peace talks and have not provided military assistance to the conflicting parties," the embassy said in a statement sent to the Global Times.
The US Commerce Department said that the targeted companies had supplied items to Russian "entities of concern" before February 24 which "continue to contract to supply Russian entity listed and sanctioned parties," according to Reuters.
Another 31 entities in multiple countries including Russia, Singapore, and the UK were also on the blacklist, with 25 out of the total 36 entities had China-based operations.
The statement from the embassy added that China and Russia maintain normal energy and trade cooperation, which should not harm the legitimate interests of Chinese companies.
According to a document released by the US Federal Register, the five companies include Connec Electronic, World Jetta (H.K.)
Logistics Limited, King Pai Technology, Winninc Electronic and Sinno Electronics Co., LtdThe statement further stressed that the unilateral sanctions and so-called "long-arm jurisdiction" imposed by the US on other countries in accordance with its domestic laws are against international law and basic norms governing international relations, and China has always been firmly opposed to such behavior.
"China will take necessary measures to safeguard the legitimate rights and interests of its companies."
the embassy noted.
Global Times
