Published Time: 2021-10-14
Title: Shared territorial concern, opposition to US intervention prompt Russia’s support to China on Taiwan question
Category 1: OPINION; Category 2: VIEWPOINT
Author: Andrey Kortunov
Author title: Author title not found
Author description: Andrey Kortunov, academic director of the Russian International Affairs Council.
Text: 
The situation around the island of Taiwan is raising concerns not only in Chinese mainland, Taiwan island or in the US, but also in the whole world.
Nobody would like to see a large-scale military clash between China and the US in the East Pacific.
Potential repercussions of such a clash, even if it does not escalate to the nuclear level, might be catastrophic for the global economy and strategic stability, not to mention huge losses in blood and treasure for both sides in this conflict.
Earlier this week, Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov stated that Moscow continued to firmly support Beijing's position on Taiwan as an integral part of China.
Moreover, he also underlined that Moscow would support Beijing in its legitimate efforts to reunite the breakaway province with the rest of the country.
A number of foreign media outlets paid particular attention not to what Lavrov actually said, but omitted his other remarks: the Russian official did not add that Moscow expects reunification to be peaceful and gradual in a way that is similar to China's repossession of Hong Kong.
Many observers of the new Taiwan Straits crisis unfolding concluded that Lavrov's statement was a clear signal to all parties of the crisis: Russia would likely back even Beijing's military takeover of the island.Of course, diplomacy is an art of ambiguity.
Lavrov clearly did not call for a military solution to the Taiwan problem.
Still, his remarks were more blunt and more supportive of Beijing than the standard Russia's rhetoric on the issue.
Why?
One possible explanation is that the Russian official simply wanted to sound nice to China as Russia's major strategic partner.
As they say, "a friend in need is a friend indeed."
Another explanation is that Lavrov recalled the Russian experience with Chechnya some time ago, when Moscow had to fight two bloody wars to suppress secessionism in the North Caucasus.
Territorial integrity means a lot for the Russian leadership.
This is something that is worth spilling blood for.
However, one can also imagine that in Russia they simply do not believe that if things go really bad for Taiwan island, the US would dare to come to its rescue and that in the end of the day Taipei would have to yield to Beijing without a single shot fired.
Therefore, the risks of a large-scale military conflict in the East Pacific are perceived as relatively low, no matter what apocalyptic scenarios various military experts might come up with.
Indeed, over last 10 or 15 years the US has developed a pretty nasty habit of inciting its friends and partners to take risky and even reckless decisions and of letting these friends and partners down, when the latter had to foot the bill for these decisions.
In 2008, the Bush administration explicitly or implicitly encouraged Georgian leader Mikheil Saakashvili to launch a military operation against South Ossetia including killing some Russian peacekeepers stationed there.
But when Russia interfered to stop and to roll back the Georgian offensive, unfortunate Saakashvili was de-facto abandoned by Washington.
During the Ukrainian conflicts of 2013-14, the Obama administration enthusiastically supported the overthrow of the legitimate president in Kiev.
However, it later preferred to delegate the management of the crisis to Berlin and to Paris, abstaining from taking part in the Normandy process and from signing the Minsk Agreements.
In 2019, President Donald Trump promised his full support to Juan Guaido, Head of the National Assembly in Venezuela, in his crusade against President Nicolas when the government of Maduro demonstrated its spectacular resilience.
Juan Guaido very soon almost completely disappeared from Washington's political radar screens.
Earlier this year the Biden administration stated its firm commitment to shouldering President Ashraf Ghani in Afghanistan in his resistance to Taliban advancements.
But when push came to shove, the US easily abandoned its local allies, evacuated its military personal in a rush and left President Ghani to seek political asylum in the United Arab Emirates.Again and again, Washington gives reasons to conclude that its partners, clients and even allies can no longer consider it as a credible security provider.
Would the US make an exception for the Taiwan island?
Of course, one can argue that the Taiwan island is more important for the US than Afghanistan, Venezuela, Ukraine and Georgia taken together.
But the price for supporting the Taiwan island could also be much higher for the US than the price it would have paid in many other crisis situations.
The chances of the US losing to China over Taiwan island, even if Washington mobilizes all of its available military power against Beijing, are also very high.
Still, we do not see such a mobilization taking place now.
It appears that the Biden administration is not ready for a real showdown with Beijing over the Taiwan question.If the US does not put its whole weight behind the Taiwan island, the latter will have to seek some kind of accommodation with the mainland on terms abandoning its pipe-dreams of self-determination and independence.
This is clear to politicians not only in East Asia, but all over the place, including Moscow.
Therefore, Sergey Lavrov has reasons to firmly align himself with the Chinese position.
The assumption in the Kremlin is that Uncle Sam will not dare to challenge militarily the Middle Kingdom.
Not this time.The author is director general of the Russian International Affairs Council.
opinion@globaltimes.com.cn
