Published Time: 2022-02-20
Title: Wading in uncharted waters, US lacks a true leader to land safely
Category 1: SOURCE; Category 2: ECONOMY
Author: Wen Sheng
Author title: Author details not found
Author description: Author details not found
Text: 
Since 2016, when Donald Trump was elected to the White House, the US has gradually waded into uncharted waters, like a lone boat drifting afar from shore.
The US is being blindfolded by short-sighted politicians.
The absence of true statesmen like Franklin D. Roosevelt or Bill Clinton has left Washington blind to its true situation.
Now facing a stubborn high inflation, an ever-growing wealth gap and racial division, as well as an elusive but still-killing pandemic at home, the Biden administration is mired in a quagmire.
It seems that throngs of Biden's supporters are deserting him, dimming his hope to keep the Democratic Party's majority in the two chambers of the US Congress in the midterm elections later this year.
On the global stage, the tense standoff between Russia and Ukraine is unlikely to be resolved any time soon, because of the US government's paranoid move to enlist more East European countries into its military alliance, in order to boost the NATO and Washington's bid to ramp up confrontation with Moscow.
Any escalation of the standoff in Europe is certain to exacerbate hostility in Europe, which will inevitably jeopardize global financial markets, the Wall Street in particular.
When the US equities market crashes, the country is likely to go down with it.
It is Washington's dumb policies, one after another, which have led to the US' current predicament.
A Chinese proverb says that only a fool will lift a stone to drop on his own feet - words that accurately sum up the last five years of the US government.
A recent report by the US Trade Representative Office said that "we cannot build a wall between the US and China and assume that it will address the problems" faced by the two nations, because "that would ignore China's importance to, and integration in, the world economy".
The Office said it will explore "new trade tools" to engage with China.
What the US report did not say explicitly is its unprecedented trade war with China, launched by Trump and inherited by Biden, failed to damage China's giant economy.
On the contrary, the excess tariffs levied by the US on Chinese goods have contributed, significantly, to the inflated commodity prices in America, while China is sailing with steadily rising exports with almost every trade partner in the world.
In January, US inflation surged by 7.5 percent, the highest level in 40 years, drawing uproars of grievance from the American public making lives harder and households poorer.
In sharp contrast, consumer price index rose merely 0.9 percent in the same month in China.
From the onset of the trade war in 2018, Chinese officials and economists had warned that imposing higher punitive tariffs on more than $360 billion of Chinese goods would not end well with the US, simply because China is the world's largest and most important manufacturing engine.
If an economy turns its back on Chinese goods, it undoubtedly will suffer from a self-inflicted supply chain disruption, and, shortage of commodities and price hikes.
And, who could have predicted that pumping money by the Biden administration and the Federal Reserve into an unproductive or ailing economy like the US' would be this inflationary?
But the US' former secretary of treasury Lawrence Summers and other renowned economists sounded the alarm a year ago.
Janet Yellen, the incumbent secretary of treasury, said months ago that Trump's tariffs war with China inflated the prices in the US and suggested the duties be removed, but she was silenced by other agenda driven administration officials.
The world has not heard from Yellen for many months.
It's very regretful that the Biden team did not move to correct the erroneous course of the Trump administration in its dealings with China.
In the past 12 months, the White House even hardened its geopolitical posturing, trying to contain China's economic rise by placing dozens of Chinese high-tech companies on its sanctioning list.
One result of the economic confrontation is global supply disruptions of important industrial proponents like semiconductor microchips, which made new and used cars particularly expensive on the market.On ways to tackle the pandemic, the US mainstream media has kept criticizing China's "dynamic zero COVID" playbook, while the US itself has wobbled from mask and vaccine mandates to lifting the mandates prematurely and recklessly.The result is gruesome - whenever there erupted a new variant, Delta, Omicron or others, new waves of infections, hospitalizations and deaths had gripped the US.
Possibly to seek psychological comfort, some US media outlets are portending how many Chinese people would get infected and die, once China decides to open its door to let foreigners freely in.
The latest USTR report said the US strategy should focus on the long term and needs to be "more flexible and sophisticated" in interacting with China.
It is a subtle change of tone by the Biden administration, being perplexed by soaring inflation.
But the US government should do more.
It needs to stop viewing China as the US' strategic foe, eliminating the trade tariffs and removing all the Chinese companies from its sanctioning blacklist, stopping interfering in China's domestic affairs, and abolish its Cold War-mode hostile groupings like the QUAD and AUKUS.
Otherwise, mistrust toward the US among billions of Chinese people being built up since 2016 won't easily go, who will continue to demand Beijing speed up modernization of China's economy, technology and national defense.
The author is an editor with the Global Times.
bizopinion@globaltimes.com.cn
