Published Time: 2022-01-29
Title: US itself should put out the fire it set in Ukraine: Global Times editorial
Category 1: OPINION; Category 2: EDITORIAL
Author: Global Times
Author title: Author details not found
Author description: Author details not found
Text: 
US Undersecretary of State for Political Affairs Victoria Nuland on Thursday called on Beijing "to use its influence with Moscow" to urge a diplomatic solution to the Ukraine crisis.
Nuland also said "if there is a conflict in Ukraine it is not going to be good for China either," as "there will be a significant impact on the global economy" and in the energy sphere.
On the same day, US Secretary of State Antony Blinken requested a phone conversation with China's State Councilor and Foreign Minister Wang Yi, during which the US mainly talked about the Ukraine issue.
Blinken underscored the risks posed by "further Russian aggression against Ukraine" and conveyed that "de-escalation and diplomacy are the responsible way forward."
Washington is trying to create such a public opinion impression that the US is working hard to alleviate the crisis.
It wants to kick the ball to Russia and China, making them bear the responsibility while shaping the US as a good man.
After Washington set a fire in Ukraine, it has pretended to be a victim and imagines China to "persuade" Russia to put it out.
It must be pointed out that Washington is blowing smoke to reverse the cause and the effect.
The root cause of the Ukraine issue is that the US has promoted NATO's eastward expansion unrestrainedly, thus pushing Russia into a corner where there is no way to retreat.
Washington is the culprit of the crisis.
The US now hopes China will "persuade" Russia.
In essence it wants China to urge Moscow to make a concession.
The perfect plan Washington desires is that Moscow will cooperate unconditionally with the US' geopolitical ambitions.
How absurd and ridiculous its logic is!
Washington is the root cause for many major regional crises aside from the Ukraine issue.
The Korean Peninsula nuclear crisis, Iran nuclear issue, and the Afghan chaos caused by the US troops' withdrawal last year are the "hornet's nests" stirred up by the US.
When the US messes up a region and finds it unable to clean up the situation, it hopes to draw other countries into paying for its mistakes.
In recent years, Washington has expected China's participation in the resolution of almost all major international crises.
On one hand, it has done its utmost to crack down on China, and on the other, it has had the temerity to seek China's help.
This is the case this time.
The US is carrying out strategic suppression on China in the Asia-Pacific region as it is doing with Russia while at the same time it hopes China will urge Russia to make a concession.
It hopes to take all the benefits while doing bad things.
When handling regional conflicts, the biggest difference between China and the US is that China seeks peaceful solutions but the US seeks chaos.
China has never kidnapped the collective interests of the region for its own interests, but instead, has always taken a responsible attitude and looked for a solution based on facts.
China has never shied away from making mediation efforts within its capacity.
It doesn't choose to act or not act simply because it has a good relationship or a competition with some other country.
China has pursued an independent foreign policy and always respects other countries' independence.
It makes active efforts to push relevant parties to return to the negotiating table and take care of all parties' security concerns to find the greatest common ground in complicated situations.
From our point of view, to ease tensions in Ukraine, it is the US that has the most room for action.
Washington should first stop making provocations in this region, and let Europe solve its own security problems.
While rejecting Russia's legitimate concerns on the issue of NATO's eastward expansion, the US continues to step up efforts to create tension - withdrawing US diplomats in Ukraine, and continuing to send weapons to Ukraine.
Because Germany refused to be the follower of the US this time, American opinion accused it of being a "traitor" of the West.
The US clearly sees itself as the plenipotentiary of Europe.
After the end of WWII, the US and the West have been unrestrainedly emphasizing and expanding so-called collective defense, even at the cost of global strategic stability.
However, it turns out that the more they pursue collective defense, the more the safety of members outside the small circles is damaged, and the more they have to strengthen their own security.
Consequently, the US and the West have fallen into a curse of "the safer they want to be, the less safe they are," which has caused crises one after another.
If Washington's ultra-strategic selfishness remains unrestrained, then even if the Ukraine crisis reaches a soft landing, the next crisis awaits.
To solve the Ukraine crisis, if we are to play a mediating role, we would like to advise Washington that "whoever hung the bell on the tiger's neck must untie it."
It should give up the zero-sum game and the Cold War mentality as soon as possible, and use the correct method to put out the fire it set.
