Published Time: 2022-02-03
Title: Upcoming Xi-Putin meeting to lay out structure for post-pandemic China-Russia ties, Wang Yi says in meeting with Lavrov
Category 1: CHINA; Category 2: DIPLOMACY
Author: Global Times
Author title: Author details not found
Author description: Author details not found
Text: 
The meeting in the new year between Chinese President Xi Jinping and Russian President Vladimir Putin is to lay out the structure of post-pandemic relations between China and Russia, which embodies the high-level strategic cooperation of the two countries, as well as the deep mutual trust and friendship between the two state leaders, said Chinese State Councilor and Foreign Minister Wang Yi when meeting with Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov on Thursday.Wang called this face-to-face meeting with Lavrov an opportunity to finalize political preparations ahead of tse State leaders' meeting on Friday.
It is third day into the Chinese Lunar New Year, and the day for visiting relatives and celebrating the spring.
We welcome the visit of our old friend, said Wang.Wang said that under the leadership of Xi and Putin, China and Russia held grand celebration of the 20th anniversary of signing of China-Russia Treaty of Good-Neighborliness and Friendly Cooperation last year.
The strategic cooperation between the two countries is going deeper and becoming more pragmatic, said Wang, noting that the two countries have shown firmer confidence in safeguarding core interests, achieved more fruitful results in mutually beneficial cooperation as well as have seen effective measures in tackling challenges.
Now that China and Russia have ushered in new development opportunities, China is willing to meet Russia halfway and to implement consensus of two state leaders to deepen cooperation between the two countries, unwaveringly safeguard global equality and justice as well as bring benefits to two peoples, said Wang.
Wang also noted that advancing the Belt and Road Initiative to connect with the Eurasian Economic Union is an important consensus reached by two state leaders, and the two countries have achieved strong initial results and that China is willing to strengthen connectivity with Russia, and actively push forward cooperation across the upstream, midstream and downstream industrial chain cooperation in the energy sector.
Now that all the obstacles for pragmatic cooperation between the countries caused by COVID-19 have been addressed, said Wang, noting the two sides should ensure normal exchanges between people and in trade, to push forwardthe  bilateral practical cooperation, said Wang.
Lavrov also said that he is happy to visit old friends in China during the Chinese Lunar New Year.
The two state leaders' meeting on Friday will push relation between China and Russia closer, which carries significant meaning for building modern international relations system and global sustainable development.
He noted that the two countries have carried out high level strategic cooperation and close coordination, which is not affected by the international situation and helps boost stability and predictability into international relations.
The opening ceremony of Beijing Winter Olympics is kicking off tomorrow, said Lavrov, noting that Beijing will be the first city to hold both the Summer and Winter Olympic Games.
The world will witness China's extraordinary ability in hosting the global sports feast after overcoming the impact of the pandemic.
The two sides agreed to stick to the Olympic spirit and oppose politicization of the event.
They have also committed to upholding peace and stability within Asia Pacific and opposed any attempt to create antagonism and confrontation among camps and groups.Russia also briefed the Chinese side on the new development in Russia-US relations and Russia-NATO relations, and stressed its own stance on the issue, to which China expressed understanding and support.
The two sides also aligned their position on international and regions issues of common concern including the BRICS cooperation, Ukraine, Afghanistan and the Korean Peninsula issues.
The two later signed documents outlining diplomatic cooperation.
Global Times.
