Published Time: 2023-12-20
Title: Dates for 2024 Global Times Annual Conference confirmed, to be themed on how Chinese modernization will cope with changes unseen in a century
Category 1: CHINA; Category 2: SOCIETY
Author: Global Times
Author title: Author details not found
Author description: Author details not found
Text: 
Looking back at the year that is about to pass, everyone has developed a deeper understanding of the major assertion that "the world is experiencing a transformation unseen in a century, and it is accelerating.
"Throughout 2023, the international security situation remains severe, with the Ukraine crisis still unresolved and renewed conflict between Israel and Palestine.
The global economy is on a post-pandemic  path to recovery, but the pace remains slow and uneven, combating inflation remains a top priority for many economies; issues like climate change, artificial intelligence, and the food crisis continue to call for global unity and collaboration.
However, notions such as "decoupling" and "de-risk" keep adding risks of division to the international order.Faced with the turbulent, rapidly evolving global situation, and the profound questions of where humanity is headed historically, globally, and through the ages, China has presented its answer through the concept of Chinese modernization.
China has achieved its first centennial goal and is marching toward building a great modern socialist country, fulfilling its second centennial goal.
Chinese modernization encapsulates both the summary of historical success and has become the "keyword" for the comprehensive promotion of the great rejuvenation of the Chinese nation in the new era.In an era filled with both challenges and opportunities, Chinese modernization will become a key to understanding the interaction between China and the world.
On December 23, the  will take place, themed under the topic: "Following the Path of Chinese Modernization: Coping with Changes Unseen in a century."
Over a hundred authoritative figures, experts, and scholars from politics, academia, and business sectors both domestically and internationally will gather to offer insights and have intellectual exchanges on four major topics: "Population, Industry, and Market: The Underlying Logic of Chinese Modernization," "Development, Security, and Civilization: The Global Outlook of Chinese Modernization," "Conflict, Competition, and Cooperation: The External Environment of Chinese Modernization," and "Innovation, Technology, and Humanities: The Future Vision of Chinese Modernization."
During the conference, the Global Times Research Center will also release the results of the 2023 Global Poll.On December 24, the conference will host a sub-forum on "Following the Path of Chinese Modernization: Endeavoring to Ensure Good Health for All" under the Global Life and Health Forum.
Senior government health officials, senior medical practitioners, and authoritative scholars will engage in discussions on two major topics: "Heritage, Innovation, and Integration: The Chinese Wisdom in Traditional Medicine" and "Co-Existence with Nature and Nurturing Wellness: The Chinese Vision for a Better Life."
Additionally, a themed forum on "China's Practice in Ensuring Mental Health for Everyone" will be organized.
