Published Time: 2023-10-26
Title: How has the US tied the 'dead knot' in Palestinian-Israeli conflict?
Category 1: IN-DEPTH; Category 2: IN-DEPTH
Author: Wang Jin
Author title: Author details not found
Author description: Author details not found
Text: 
Editor's Note:The recent escalation of conflict between Palestine and Israel is unusually intense in terms of casualties.
Despite being the most important third party in resolving the Palestinian-Israeli conflict, the US vetoed a UN Security Council resolution that would have called for "humanitarian pauses" to deliver lifesaving aid to millions in Gaza.
Allowing the conflict to escalate in this manner will lead to more innocent civilian deaths and injuries.
During a joint press conference with Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu in Tel Aviv on October 12, US Secretary of State Antony Blinken said, "You may be strong enough on your own to defend yourself, but as long as America exists, you will never, ever have to.
We will always be there by your side."
US President Joe Biden also promised unprecedented military assistance to Israel.
In recent years, the US has faced international criticism for sidelining Palestinians' right to statehood and showing biased support for Israel.
When will the US become a true peace mediator?Pure lip serviceThe Israeli-Palestinian conflict is currently the most complex and urgent international political issue facing the international community.
The essence of the conflict lies in how Jews and Palestinians can achieve a just and lasting peace based on the "two-state solution."
After World War II, Zionist organizations gradually sought support from the US to replace British presence in the region.
On November 29, 1947, the United Nations General Assembly passed Resolution 181 on the partition of Palestine, deciding to establish an Arab state and a Jewish state in the region.
On May 14, 1948, Israel was officially established based on this resolution, and the US, under President Harry Truman, quickly became the first country to recognize Israeli sovereignty.
Since the early 1950s, the US, along with the UK and France, has issued declarations assuming security obligations toward Israel, and the military and economic assistance provided by the US to Israel has been continuous.During the third Arab-Israeli war in 1967, Israel not only occupied all the Arab territories as stipulated in Resolution 181, but also captured the Sinai Peninsula of Egypt, the Golan Heights of Syria, and other Arab territories.
Faced with the new battlefield situation and Israel's occupation of East Jerusalem, the Gaza Strip, and the West Bank, the United Nations Security Council (UNSC) passed Resolution 242 on November 22, 1967, urging Israel to withdraw from the occupied territories in exchange for peace and recognition of borders.
The principle of "land for peace" embodied in Resolution 242 has become an internationally recognized approach to addressing the Palestinian-Israeli conflict.
During the same period, as the rivalry between the US and the Soviet Union intensified, Israel, which held an increasingly strategic position in the Middle East, became a trump card for the US to contain Soviet expansion in the region.After the fourth Arab-Israeli war in 1973, Egypt, burdened by its long-term involvement in the war, hoped to achieve peace with Israel.
Israel also realized that simply occupying Egyptian territory and implementing defensive measures would not effectively solve its own security issues, so it began to explore the possibility of peace with Egypt.
Subsequently, the US intervened in the peace process between Egypt and Israel, with then Secretary of State Henry Kissinger shuttling between Arab countries and Israel, conveying messages and successfully easing hostilities between the warring parties.In March 1977, then US president Jimmy Carter said, "There has to be a homeland provided for the Palestinian refugees who have suffered for many, many years."
However, such remarks were quickly met with strong opposition from Jewish groups in the US.
In 1978, Carter hosted the Camp David peace negotiations between Egypt and Israel, which led to the normalization of relations between Israel and the first Arab country.
The Camp David Accords included a call for relevant parties to engage in discussions on Palestinian autonomy in the West Bank and Gaza Strip.For a long time, the international community has advocated for the establishment of an independent and sovereign Palestinian state with East Jerusalem as its capital in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip.
However, the US has repeatedly disregarded the rights of the Palestinians.
In November 1988, during the 19th extraordinary session of the Palestinian National Council, the establishment of the State of Palestine was declared, but its borders were not determined.
On November 26 that same year, then US Secretary of State George Shultz issued a statement stating that the Reagan administration refused to grant a visa to Yasser Arafat, the chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO), who was expected to attend a United Nations conference.
This move by the US drew condemnation from many countries.After the end of the Cold War, the US organized several peace negotiations on the Palestinian-Israeli conflict, but has since been unable to effectively resolve the differences between Palestine and Israel.
The Roadmap for Peace in the Middle East launched in 2003 openly supports the establishment of an independent Palestinian state.
The plan was proposed by former US president George W. Bush and was determined through joint consultations by the US, Russia, the United Nations, and the EU, with the aim of resolving the Palestinian-Israeli conflict in three stages.
The biggest difference between the Roadmap plan and previous plans was that it explicitly proposes the concept of two states "living side by side.
"However, an article published in the Foreign Policy on October 19 argues that the "United States has long maintained that it supports a two-state solution to the conflict.
But the reality is that little more than lip service has been paid to this goal, and with each passing crisis, Washington grows more and more aligned with Israel.
"At the United Nations level, the US has continuously obstructed the efforts of Palestine to seek statehood.
On November 29, 2012, on the International Day of Solidarity with the Palestinian People, the UN General Assembly passed a resolution upgrading Palestine's status at the UN to "non-member observer state" status.
However, at the Security Council level, the United States has consistently vetoed Palestine's bid for full UN membership.Ignoring Palestinians' right to life and of returnSince the end of the Cold War, especially after the Oslo Accords in 1993, the US has continued to dominate Palestinian-Israeli peace negotiations and still considers Israel as its main ally in the Middle East.
The cooperation between the two countries includes enhancing Israel's military early warning capabilities, joint counter-terrorism efforts, intelligence sharing, and the prevention of the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
However, due to the US neglecting the concerns of the Palestinians and failing to address their demands on issues such as the status of Jerusalem, the delineation of the West Bank border, and the right of return for refugees, the negotiations have repeatedly failed.The stagnation of the Palestinian-Israeli peace process has had a negative impact on the internal Palestinian sentiment, leading to new factional disputes.
In the new century, the US has championed Western political values such as "democracy" and "free elections" and exerted pressure on the Palestinian Authority to hold open elections.
After the 2006 Palestinian Legislative Council elections, Hamas was widely supported and formed the government.
However, the US and Israel, claiming that "terrorist organizations cannot join the government," jointly intervened in Palestinian internal affairs, leading to political instability in Palestine.Furthermore, the US has tacitly allowed or even condoned Israel's unilateral blockade of the Gaza Strip, resulting in the continuous deterioration of the local economy and living conditions, ultimately leading to the current Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
"Washington traditionally shields its ally Israel from any Security Council action."
After the US recently vetoed a humanitarian aid resolution at the UN Security Council, Reuters made this comment.
For nearly half a century, the US has used its position as a permanent member of the Security Council to block numerous resolutions condemning Israel.On December 6, 2017, then US president Donald Trump formally recognized Jerusalem as the capital of Israel and stated that the American Embassy would be moved from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem.
His "new approach to conflict between Israel and the Palestinians" has further intensified tensions in the region.
The fundamental cause of the latest round of Palestinian-Israeli conflict lies in the US abandoning its mediation efforts, thwarting hopes for peace between the two sides.
Throughout previous Middle East peace negotiations, the US' bias and indulgence toward Israel have undermined the Palestinians' confidence in Palestinian-Israeli peace.
After the failure of then Secretary of State John Kerry's mediation attempt in 2014, the US gave up on restructuring Israeli-Palestinian peace talks.
Since then, neither the Trump nor Biden administration has initiated new peace dialogues.Eroding basis for dialogueIn 2020, the "Deal of the Century" and the Arab-Israeli Abraham Accords promoted by Trump fundamentally eroded the basis for dialogue between Palestine and Israel.
In the "Deal of the Century," mainly drafted by Trump's adviser and son-in-law Jared Kushner, the US shifted its view of the Palestine-Israel issue to an economic development problem and proposed the construction of various "industrial zones" to relocate Palestinians to the Negev Desert in exchange for economic development opportunities, compromising their demands for an independent state, territorial boundaries, clarification on the status of Jerusalem, and the right of return for refugees.
The US no longer regarded the Palestinian issue as the core of the Middle Eastern problem, no longer adhered to the principle of "land for peace," and no longer considered East Jerusalem to be the future capital of the Palestinian state, which was met with Palestinian displeasure.On issues such as Jewish settlements in the West Bank, the US also condones and tolerates Israel's occupation of Palestinian land, undermining the foundation of peace talks between Israel and Palestine.
The so-called Abraham Accords limits the scope of the Palestinian capital to small towns in the suburbs of East Jerusalem and does not grant the right of return to Palestinian refugees to their previous land.For a long time, the majority of Arab countries have adhered to the principle of "solving the Palestinian-Israeli issue first before discussing Arab-Israeli relations" in their development of relations with Israel, in order to promote lasting peace in the entire Middle Eastern region.
However, the US hopes to reconstruct its Middle East alliance strategy by adjusting Israel's relations with Arab countries, especially with Gulf Arab countries, in order to strategically contain hostile countries in the region such as Iran and Syria.
Therefore, against the backdrop of the unresolved Palestinian-Israeli issue, the US is eager to promote the normalization process of Arab-Israeli relations, gradually "economizing" and marginalizing the Palestinian issue.In September 2020, the US brokered the signing of the Abraham Accords among Bahrain, the United Arab Emirates, and Israel.
Although this move has led to the normalization of relations between some Arab countries and Israel, it has also sparked strong anger among the Palestinian people due to further marginalization of the Palestinian issue.
In recent years, as rumors of the normalization of relations between countries like Saudi Arabia and Israel driven by the US increased, feelings of being "abandoned" and "forgotten" among the Palestinian people only grew stronger, and it was only a matter of time before intense resistance against Israel erupted.Amid the escalating crisis in the current conflict, the US has not only failed to reflect on its own Middle East policy but also continues to smear the resistance of the Palestinian people, turning a blind eye to Israel's illegal expansion into occupied territories.
Following the outbreak of the current round of conflicts between Israel and Palestine, the US President, Secretary of State, Secretary of Defense have visited Israel, dispatched aircraft carrier strike groups to the Middle East, provided various military supplies to Israel, and vetoed relevant resolutions by the UNSC, allowing the conflict to escalate.
In resolving the Palestinian-Israeli issue, the US should shoulder its due responsibility instead of treating the conflict like a tool in domestic political power struggles, let alone using it as an opportunity to attack other countries in the region.
The US should cooperate with the international community to expedite a peaceful resolution to the conflict, rather than exploiting it for personal gain.The author is an associate professor of Middle East Studies at China's Northwest University
