Published Time: 2024-01-02
Title: Gaza crisis exposes last fig leaf of US double standards
Category 1: OPINION; Category 2: VIEWPOINT
Author: Wang Yan and Zhang Yuanshi
Author title: Author details not found
Author description: Author details not found
Text: 
As the Palestine-Israel conflict drags on, in a clear pro-Israel move, the US has formed the Red Sea task force to beef up security in the critical global shipping lane, and Houthi forces in Yemen have vowed to keep up attacks on commercial shipping after the US announced the formation of the coalition.
Last week, US helicopters sank three Houthi boats and killed those aboard in the Red Sea after coming under fire.
Nonetheless, the White House said it is not seeking a wider conflict.The Red Sea crisis is an extension of the Palestine-Israel conflict, exacerbated by the US' continuous support for Israel.
Gaza is facing a human rights disaster.
However, the US is shamelessly spreading lies about the lack of human rights in Xinjiang by claiming that the prosperous and developed Xinjiang, where people live and work in peace, is experiencing "genocide."
In fact, the common goal of the 25 million people in Xinjiang is to enjoy human rights.
In 2023, from the eight major industrial clusters to a modern industrial system that reflects Xinjiang's characteristics and strengths, from the core area of the Belt and Road Initiative to the China (Xinjiang) Pilot Free Trade Zone, Xinjiang anchored its strategic position in the overall national development plan, made use of its advantages according to local conditions, and promoted the steady and rapid development of various human rights undertakings through high-quality economic development.
In 2023, Xinjiang's cotton production reached 5.112 million tons, accounting for over 90 percent of the national total.
The people of all ethnic groups in Xinjiang are creating a happy life, and working diligently for an advantageous economic environment.
However, American politicians pretend not to see the growing economy, the people's well-being and the prosperity of ethnic unity in Xinjiang.
Instead, they block the truth, fabricate facts and use human rights as a pretext to launch sanctions to undermine Xinjiang's economic environment, arbitrarily reduce employment opportunities for ethnic minorities, and interfere with the opportunity for the people of all ethnic groups in Xinjiang to create a better life.
They deceive the world with their media advantage and create obstacles that prevent the world from understanding the real Xinjiang in China.
They use human rights as a pretext to achieve the sinister conspiracy of containing China through Xinjiang, which is extremely malicious.Instead of actively push for a permanent cease-fire and stop the humanitarian disaster in Gaza, the US considers the economic development and the improvement of the well-being of the people in Xinjiang "genocide."
The US disregards facts and logic.
This deeply reflects the double standards and hypocrisy of its human rights, and the core of this is the hegemonic thinking of the US.
As long as the US can gain political capital and not undermine its hegemonic status, it can resort to any means at any cost.
The well-being of the people in Xinjiang and the lives of the Palestinian people are of no value to the US.
Gaza's disaster has exposed the last fig leaf of the US' double standards of human rights.There is a famous Uygur proverb that says, "Dogs bark, but the caravan goes on!"
Xinjiang will continue to write a new chapter of high-quality development in the field of human rights in a peaceful and harmonious atmosphere.Wang Yan is a professor at Xinjiang Normal University.
Zhang Yuanshi graduated from the PLA University of Foreign Languages.
opinion@globaltimes.com.cn
