Published Time: 2024-02-26
Title: US signals progress on Gaza cease-fire deal, but influence on Mideast conflict doubted
Category 1: CHINA; Category 2: DIPLOMACY
Author: Zhang Han
Author title: Author details not found
Author description: Author details not found
Text: 
Although the US signals that progress has been made on a cease-fire deal in the Gaza Strip, Israeli strikes continue and Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu reaffirmed Israel's goal of "total victory" against Hamas, hinting at a ground offensive on Rafah with or without a deal.
Whether or not a cease-fire deal can be reached in the near future, Chinese observers on Monday doubted a deal can influence the big picture of the Palestinian-Israeli conflict when the situation is developing toward Israel's hopes at the cost of Palestinians' lives.
US National Security Adviser Jake Sullivan told CNN on Sunday local time that negotiators for the US, Egypt, Qatar and Israel "came to an understanding" on the basic contours of a hostage deal during talks in Paris, Reuters reported.
The deal is still under negotiation, said Sullivan, who added there will have to be indirect discussions by Qatar and Egypt with Hamas.However, Netanyahu told CBS it was not clear yet whether a hostage deal would materialize from the talks.
"If we have a (cease-fire) deal, it will be delayed somewhat, but it will happen.
"A Gaza deal also won't affect Israel's Hezbollah fight, France24 quoted Israeli Defense Minister Yoav Gallant as saying.
Liu Zhongmin, a professor at the Middle East Studies Institute of Shanghai International Studies University, told the Global Times that the temporary cease-fire deal under discussion and the Palestinian-Israeli conflict are actually two different matters.
The deal will be similar to the one in November, but that cannot bring peace to the Middle East, analysts said.
Given Israel's attitude on a cease-fire deal, the continuous strikes and a recent "post-war Gaza plan," the war will continue in the direction of Israel's hopes, Liu said.Liu worried that even though the war, which has claimed nearly 30,000 Palestinian lives, will ultimately end, the bilateral balance will never return to the situation before October 7, 2023.
Israel has a systematic plan to attack Gaza and enhance its control over the Strip and even the West Bank, where Palestinians used to reside, and that would severely erode the right of self-determination of the Palestinian people, Liu said.
According to the plan released on Thursday, Israel would maintain security and military control over all land west of Jordan, including the occupied West Bank and Gaza - territories where the Palestinians want to create their independent state, Al Jazeera reported Friday.Palestinian Prime Minister Mohammad Shtayyeh resigned on Monday as US pressure grows on President Abbas to shake up the Palestinian Authority and begin work on a political structure that can govern a Palestinian state following the war, Al Jazeera reported on Monday.
Considering the prospects of the war, the ongoing cease-fire deal negotiation, for Israel and the US, is nothing more than a diplomatic approach to addressing mounting domestic and international pressure, Liu said.
If the US does want a meaningful cease-fire and cares about civilians in Gaza, it would not have vetoed three rounds of UN Security Council resolutions calling for an immediate cease-fire, Liu said, adding that the US' support for a two-state solution is "lip deep."
After the latest veto, US isolation became more apparent at the Group of 20 meeting, where countries including Brazil, South Africa and the US' close ally Australia criticized the war in Gaza with stern remarks in contrast to the US' indulgent actions.
Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesperson Mao Ning said at Monday's routine press briefing that the escalation of the latest Palestinian-Israeli conflict has resulted in the devastating humanitarian situation in Gaza.
Nearly 30,000 civilians were killed and about 1.9 million people were displaced.An immediate cease-fire is the prevailing call and overwhelming consensus of the international community.
The US should lend an ear and take concrete actions to play a constructive role for the cease-fire and deescalation of the humanitarian crisis, Mao said.
