Published Time: 2023-08-01
Title: First Chinese female 100-meter freediver explains the sport in her eyes
Category 1: SPORT; Category 2: WATER SPORT
Author: Lou Kang
Author title: Author details not found
Author description: Author details not found
Text: 
What does it feel like to dive 100 meters deep under the surface of the ocean with one breath?
"The hydrostatic pressure will be 11 times than that a person feels on the ground," Xu Tongtong, Chinese freediver and the country's record breaker, told the Global Times in a recent interview.A person now titled with two record-breaking champions, the 35-year-old Xu is now the first woman of China reaching 100 meters under the sea level in history, after she claimed a gold in Constant weight (CWT) freediving discipline in Asian Freediving Cup in the Philippines in June.The win of her first 100-meter try gave her courage.
During July, in another competition she participated in AIDA Panglao Depth Championship in Bohol Island, the Philippines, Xu finished her another 100-meter challenge in the Constant weight bi-fins (CWTB) depth discipline, ranking second place in the world.
"If we compare the 100 meters to the height of a building, it means we are about to jump from the 30th floor to the ground and then climb back to the roof top, with one breath," Xu added.
"I feel so happy when I touched and grabbed the tab underwater.
This was a goal I set for myself three years ago, and I feel nice that the world can see the efforts we made as Chinese freediving athletes," she told the Global Times in an interview on the phone at her home in the Philippines.The two records Xu set pushed China to reach the next level: Since then the depth record of Chinese women in freediving has entered the 100-meter level.
'First try'Xu now lives in Boho Island, an area covering an area of 3,269 kilometers and known as top island in the Philippines.The Boho Island has been boasting its hospitality of the freediving lovers.
And it is also among the most popular freediving destinations in the country where international competitions are often held here.But for Xu, the place means much more than a freediving heaven, as both of the two competitions she participated in with record breaking also took place here in Boho Island.June's competition is her first ever try in challenging 100 meters freediving.
"I made it," recalled Xu.
"That was an unprecedented experience for me as I remembered my smile as I swam up out of the surface."
Before heading to the competition, she undergone a three-month systematic training where her coach developed a training program cut out for her.
"There were different proportions I needed to devote to in including the physical training and muscle training.
"Based on her training plan, the last training Xu had the free diving reached 98 meters under the water.
"By two meters deeper during each try, I would reach 100 meters by the time of my competition day.
""This needs a stable state of mind.
If you're nervous you fail, but if you're not you win," Xu added.Explaining the trick of the sport, Xu said that it is the opposite of the others as one needs to calm her/him down to be "as stable as possible in order to slow down the heart rate, which is essential to reduce the oxygen consumption.
"A yearn for oceanBorn in Anhui, a landlocked province in East China, the 35-year-old free diver has a nickname Mutou, translated as wood often known by her friends.
She also named her social media atlas after Mutou.She believed in the flexibility of the wood as "a piece of wood can be carved into anything you want.
And I wish I can have the quality just as the wood.
"Xu started her swimming training as early as 8.
Being a professional swimmer, Xu has participated in a string of competitions nationwide, where she won second place as her best result.
Xu's free diving enlightenment came from a video she accidentally came across on social media.
As early as 2012, when she saw the famous French freediving champion Guillaume Néry "flying" in the ocean.
"Normally we swim horizontally, but I never try swimming vertically.
And I decided to have a try.
"From 2012 to 2017, Xu has traveled to islands across the world for freediving, where she would immerse in the enjoyment the ocean brought her.
"If we carry gas cylinders, the bubbles that pop out will keep those sea creatures from approaching us.
We are just 'guests' in the ocean, and in the ocean, we are so small," said Xu.In the years of her career in ocean, she also received help from Israeli freediving legend Aharon Solomons, who she met in China when the later traveled there for freediving classes.According to Solomons, freediving is a kind of sport that requires intelligence, commitments and common sense, where he believed that Xu has all of them.
Among many sports, freediving can be dangerous, but "she has been outstanding," Solomons told the Global Times in an interview.
"I also feel honored that he coached me during my entering stage of the sport, and I've never experienced from a single injury," Xu recalled her experience when learning from Solomons.Now in Israel, Solomons is still preparing for more competitions as he told the Global Times.
