Published Time: 2021-09-09
Title: While sowing discord around China, the US is heading to be a 'failing state'
Category 1: OPINION; Category 2: OBSERVER
Author: Lin Lan
Author title: Author details not found
Author description: Author details not found
Text: 
The Guardian published an article on Wednesday titled "'Like Game of Thrones': how triple crisis on China's borders will shape its global identity."
The article says that North Korea, Myanmar and Afghanistan are "three ongoing crises in China's neighborhood," and called the three countries "failing states.
"The logic of this article is reversed.
It is not that these three countries neighboring China are "failing states."
Instead, China's neighbors are targeted by the US to infiltrate and create disorder.
Washington intends to use them to levy pressure on China.
The chaos or difficulties faced by these countries are due to the intervention or suppression from the US.Russia is also a major country the US deems as a rival, and Russia's neighboring countries, like Ukraine and Belarus, have also been infiltrated by the US.
Washington aims at turning these countries into pawns in its strategic competition with Beijing and Moscow.The Guardian's report quoted Thant Myint-U, historian and former presidential adviser of Myanmar, who declared that the Western approach to "failing states" is rooted in "ideas around elections, democracy, and human rights."
But obviously, by doing so, the US' real purpose is to find excuses for interfering in these countries.
The US government does not give any consideration to the feelings of local people, nor does it care about the interests of these countries.
"If the model imposed by the West is really suitable for these countries, then local people would have accepted it.
But in fact, most people and political parties in these countries have rejected the US model.
This shows that the model advocated by the US and the West is a political manipulation with evil intentions, rather than providing real freedom and democracy that benefit local people," Li Haidong, professor at the Institute of International Relations of the China Foreign Affairs University, told the Global Times.However, such infiltration of the US is doomed to fail.
Take Afghanistan, for example.
The US tried to spread democracy in Afghanistan in the past 20 years, yet its hasty withdrawal shows that its so-called fight against terrorism and promotion of "democratic reforms" has completely failed.
The US' barbaric acts will undoubtedly run up against a stone wall in the world.
However, China has always respected the sovereignty and independence of Afghanistan.
The Afghan Taliban has shown its will to engage in good relations with China.
The head of the Afghan Taliban Political Commission, Mullah Abdul Ghani Baradar, said in a meeting in July with Chinese State Councilor and Foreign Minister Wang Yi that China has always been a reliable friend of the Afghan people.
The Taliban has also said that it welcomes Chinese investments in Afghanistan's reconstruction.
"It now appears that the US is more like a 'failing state,' not these countries.
The US government has failed to control the COVID-19 epidemic and its hasty withdrawal from Afghanistan has embarrassed itself in the international community.
With unsuccessful governance, there are more signs showing that the US is becoming a typical failing state but it refuses to admit this itself," Li said.Some Western countries and media outlets are still immersed in their own fantasies, sensationally hyping the "crises" surrounding China.
In fact, most of China's neighboring countries are stable, as the center of the global economy is shifting from the US and Europe to Asia.
